If success is this lagging indicator of commitment now, how can you be sure that you are paying your dues? The best-selling author and host. The number one health and wellness podcast. On Purpose with Jay Shetty. Society has gone in the direction of becoming addicted to pleasure. Yes. Or pleasure-seeking. Where, from the Stoic's perspective, why did we even ever go down that road? Like, why did we leave wisdom and self-control? Or did we never have it at all and we've always been trying to balance it? Yeah. I mean, I guess that's the big question is like, why do we take something that we like too far? Yeah. Right. So the Epicureans would say like, look, drinking is great, but if you have a hangover the next day, was it actually so great? And so, you know, if you, if you push the pleasure too far, it becomes not pleasurable, but in the moment that feels very far away, right? Like in the moment you want the thing now. Obviously sex is this thing for people. It's like the thing you're attracted to in this moment. You're not thinking about the shame or the regret or the consequences or the pain or the loss or the grief. You're not thinking of all those things you're just thinking of right now. So I think a big part of this, this where the wisdom comes in, the ability to step back and go, what am I going to think about this after I get it? What am I going to think about this later? And realizing that your mind is very good at tricking you. Just as your mind often tells you like, stop, you're too tired. You can't go any further. You actually have a lot less left in the tank. Mind also tells you, you need this thing. You won't regret it. It's a mate, you know, whatever. And it's, it's really good at putting those blinders on. And so part of, I think any meditative practice, any philosophical practice, any journaling practice is, is being able to argue with yourself a little bit, to step back and have that conversation about, well, is what I think about this true? Is the story I'm telling myself about this true? I think nowhere is this more important than for like ambitious people who have told themselves, I will be happy when I accomplish X, right? Like all the things we need to be most disciplined about ambition is one of them, because it tells you this lie that after I become a New York times best seller, after I make a million dollars, after I get a gold medal, then I'll be good. The parents will be proud of me. I'll be happy. Then I can relax and you have to have the perspective, the wisdom to go, was that ever been true ever in my life before? Has that ever been true in history? And then go, oh, okay, no, I can't tell myself that lie. That doesn't mean you don't work really hard to do stuff, but you're not doing it under the false pretenses that it's going to be conditional to your happiness. Yeah. But there's a part of us that, and I, and I love what you're saying, but there's a part of us that always believes that we are the exception, that we will know how to spend money better, that we'll know how to have love in our life better. Like we won't be the one who fumbles off the edge of a cliff. Like we're smarter than all our friends, even if we don't say that we're wiser than the people who came before us. And that's the, and that's ego is the enemy. But of course, like that, that idea, I think is what misleads us so much. Yes. Yeah. It's, it's like, okay, you're on the medal stand. You've just won the gold medal and you're not feeling happy for yourself. You're thinking, well, I could have done it faster. You're thinking, oh, I got to do it again. Right. Even in that moment, you're not able to think I'm doing it to myself right now, what I will be doing to myself in the future. And that's this sort of insidious thing. And you can understand why from an evolutionary perspective, it drives the species forward. You can also see the immense personal cost that it inflicts on us because it never allows us to be present or content or happy with what we have in that moment. And so I think, again, people think discipline is the, I always push myself to do better, do more. Discipline can also be curbing that very impulse, right? Like ordinary people, when we're talking about discipline, what we're talking about is getting off your butt, working out, resisting eating candy and eating nutritious food instead. It's, you know, managing your screen time. But I think for a lot of more disciplined people or for people who have tasted the rewards of discipline, you have to learn how to be disciplined about discipline, which is maybe the highest level of the whole thing. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Now we're, I guess now we've started talking about discipline as a tool to achieve daily or weekly, monthly, yearly tasks, but you're actually saying that we need to go back a bit, like how would you unpack that for how you're defining discipline there? Well, it's like, what's the number one cause of injury for athletes? It's overtraining, right? So like, yeah, you're ordinary person. It's like, you're not training enough. You're not working hard enough, but then at a more elite level, at a more accomplished level, actually the trouble is, hey, the race isn't for six weeks. Like, do you want to peak now or do you want to peak at the right moment, right? Or this is just a practice session. You don't have to go all out or, you know, it's a long season. Are you prepared for that? And so, you know, discipline has to be balanced with sustainability, with rest, relaxation, recuperation, recovery, all these other things, and that requires kind of a spiritual discipline on not just, hey, I can run an hour without getting tired, but like, can I stop myself from doing that if that's not what I should be doing in this moment? Yeah. And what I like about that is that I feel there's different phases and stages. In the first two years of my career where we would have met in New York and we went on a walk once as well, I think, and we were walking around the city and I remember talking about a few of these themes, but it was at that time in my life, I was working probably 18 hour days because I had to, in order to kind of break through that first level, I was still disciplined in the sense that I would make time to eat to some degree and meditate and I would make some time to do a few things of rest, but generally I was working seven days a week, 18 hours a day. And I'm very grateful I did that. I don't look back and go, oh, I wasted two years. It was brilliant. But then in the last couple of years, I've taken my evenings back. And so I don't work after 6 PM. It's just a rule. I don't want to work. I don't want to be on the phone. And I was talking to a friend and it's exactly what you said. He was saying to me, he was just like, well, don't you get less done? And I was like, no, I get more done because I know how much I have to get done. I'm far more attentive and focused. And then I'm not working at 9 PM when I can rest and recuperate. And now the next day I'm, I'm better for it. And so I hear that idea that that is also a discipline, although it could be seen as you being lazy in the evening. And I think it's the question of, well, is it easy for you to do that? Yes or no? Right. It's hard. It's actually harder for you, I imagine, to say I'm stopping at six than it is to say, I'm going to work all night till I fall asleep at my desk, right? Like, yeah, I could do that. Yeah. If my wife's not around, I could work every weekend and evening. And also it's realizing that you have multiple things that you're trying to do simultaneously. So yeah, sure. Working, continuing to work 18 hour days may help you continue to advance in your career. But if one of the also, the other things you're trying to work on is to stay married or to better yet have a happy marriage or you have children or you have your health or whatever, like you were telling me before we recorded it, you like you got in at 3 AM last night. Let's say you're a person who always wakes up very early. Like I'm a person who wakes up early, but then I also have to understand that sleep is a discipline. And so if some changes outside my control mean that I didn't go to bed to a certain time, the fact that I wake up at five, that's bad idea. And it actually requires it. You wouldn't think that sleep discipline would be a thing, but in the military, they talk about that sleep discipline. You got to get your hours because you make bad decisions when you're not rested and other people bear the consequences of those decisions. And so deciding, Hey, I'm going to skip this thing that feels comfortable to me to do, that feels natural for me to do, that I feel like I'm letting some part of myself down by not doing, I actually have to be the bigger, more self-controlled person and say, in this moment, I'm not going to do that. Right. And, and I think at the end of the day, self-discipline is the ability to have an emotion and instinct of feeling to do a thing and then to catch yourself and go, is that actually the right thing to do? Yes or no. And sometimes it is. Sometimes it's, Hey, it's cold outside and it's 5 a.m. And it's still dark and I don't want to get up, but I have to get up because I've made these commitments. I'm behind you, blah, blah, blah. And other times it is to stay in bed. Right. Just like, you know, sometimes, uh, you feel that surge of temper coming on and you have to go, no, that's not a good, like it's always the ability to step back, put the emotion, the instinct, the opinion to the test. And I think you learn this in meditation. I think you learn this for stoicism in the journaling of going like, here's the thing and I can choose it or not. I can choose to identify it or not. It is not me. The Stoics have this word ascent, right? Not like ascent up a mountain, but A-S-S-E-N-T. Do you ascent to the feeling or not? Do you agree to it, rubber stamp it, approve it, go along with it or not? Do you subscribe? Yeah. Yeah. That's what discipline is, is about. What do you ascent to and what do you not ascent to? Yeah. I wonder, I want to go out of a tangent. I want to come back to that. Cause I actually really liked that point, but a few words ago, there was something that you sparked for me. Sometimes I feel like with work, it's doable. Sometimes with even our partner or with friends, it's possible to say no, to be disciplined. I find like, and I want to ask you this from your perspective. What about a sense of dad guilt? Like we talk a lot about mom guilt and you know, if it was speaking to mom, I'd ask.about mom guilt in this scenario, but from a dad guilt point of view, like you're a dad, you know, and I see you wanting to be a good dad and you're very involved with your kids, but at the same time, you're a writer and you're in a bookstore and you're doing activist work. Like there's so many things that you do. Do you ever feel like that's like the hardest place where discipline, because it's like, even if a dad comes home at 3 a.m. and the kid wants him at 4 a.m., like, does the dad stay up? Like, what does the dad do? How does it work? Well, it's so insidious what we do is we go like, I'm doing this for my family, right? And it's like, are you? Or are you doing it for you? Are you doing it for the money? How can you be doing it for your family if you don't see those people as a result of what you're doing? Someone told me many years ago, they said love is spelled T-I-M-E. And I think about that all the time. I mean, obviously I always have things that take me away more than I would like them to be. And I suppose I could do nothing, but that would also leave me unfulfilled. That would not be me setting the example I wanna set for my kids. But at the end of the day, realizing that everything I said yes to also means saying no to someone or something else. And in some ways, I try to use that dad guilt a little constructively. I try to go, okay, this person's asking me to do this thing, or this person's offering me money to do this thing, or this is some cool opportunity. They want me to go hella skiing in British Columbia or something. And I go, I don't wanna say no to this cool opportunity. I don't wanna miss this memory. I don't wanna hurt this person's feelings. Then I go, but I am hurting a person's feelings. I am saying no to a memory. Like I am taking something away from someone. And that person is a five-year-old and they're gonna feel it far more deeply. Someone else will take my spot on that plane to British Columbia. No one will spend that time with my kids. And so I try to use that guilt constructively in the sense that I'm reminding myself always that saying yes to one thing means saying no to something else. And that conversely, saying no means saying yes, right? And that I always, as much as I can, I wanna be saying yes to the things that actually matter to me. And I wanna be putting my money where my mouth is. It's like, if someone looked at your calendar, you say you put your family first, you say family is important, blah, blah, blah. But then if I looked at your calendar, what would it show, right? If there was a custody hearing or if you were being investigated, if you were being audited, what would the receipts show? Do you actually value them? Do you put them first? And like, it should be pretty obvious whether that's true or not. Yeah, no, I have an exercise in Think Like a Monk where I ask people to do their time audit for the week. And it's literally that where it's like, and it's against your values because someone's values may be different. But the idea that your bank statement and your schedule show your values more than what you say. Yes. Right, the words that come out of our mouth are not actually our values, they're our aspirations. Those are the values you wish you had. But the values that actually go, what do you spend your money on and what do you spend your time on, like that's far more what your real values are. Yeah, I think about that. I saw this interview with Jimmy Carter many years ago and he has this sort of crisis of faith and he goes like, if I was put on trial for being a Christian, would I be convicted, right? So it's not what you say, not what you think, not what you wish, but like, what did the action show? And I think about that with Marcus Aurelius who I write a lot about the Stoic Emperor. Like he never identifies explicitly as a Stoic and one of his translators says, he never even says the word Stoicism like in his writings, but he's considered this philosopher emperor and he probably still would have been even if his writings had never survived because the deeds are there. There's a Latin expression, acta non verba, like deeds, not words. And so you have to always think, not what do I write about? What do I think about? What do I wanna be true? But what did the action show? And no one is perfect. And I think anyone auditing themselves is gonna be, there's gonna be some disappointments, but you want like the big statements of priority to be there. And to go back to the idea of guilt, when you're looking at it, you shouldn't like whip yourself and feel, but you should be like, okay, this is not the painting, the picture that I want to paint. And that you're lucky enough in that moment to catch it now, not when you're 80, not on your deathbed, you've caught it now. And so what changes are you going to make to get closer between the ideal and the reality? Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And something that's interesting that's coming out from me here is that pretty much everything we do every day can be defined by thinking, feeling, and doing. But I think we're living at a time where we're stuck in the feeling generation. So we do things because we wanna feel a certain way, but then when we feel things, we don't know what to do with it. So I'll give an example of what I mean by that. If we feel guilt, most of us don't know how to shift from that feeling into thinking and doing something different in order to not feel that guilt again. And if we wanna feel happy, we just try and feel happy, not realizing that you have to change your thoughts and what you do in order to feel happiness or whatever it may be. What I'm trying to get at there is like, that to me sounds like a discipline too, but we've gone so into feeling because I think for so long, thinking and doing were the only things talked about and we didn't feel enough. I think realizing that almost all the things you want in life are accidental byproducts of habits, processes, systems, routines, right? So Viktor Frankl famously said that happiness can't be pursued, it must ensue. It's the result of getting those big things right and then you just feel this kind of feeling of happiness as a byproduct. You don't, as you said, you don't go, today I must feel happy, right? It's the result of having meaning and purpose and taking the right actions. And so people sometimes look at the books that I've written and they're like, how did you publish so many books? And it's like, publishing is not what I think about. I think about writing. I wake up every day and write and the accidental byproduct of that is the publishing, right? And so good habits, good routines, like if you want a happier home life, it's like, are you spending more time there? How are you setting up systems or processes that the result is that outcome, right? You control what you put in, the outcome happens or it doesn't happen. And I think so often we just, you're right, we just want the feeling. So we try to cheat it or steal it or we feel guilty that we don't have it when really you could start small right now and just get yourself closer to it. What do you think is the best discipline you've built like over time? Like, is it writing? Obviously that would be the obvious one, but is there another one that you think underpins that success? Like, is there a discipline you've worked on the longest? Well, I think writing is such a sedentary sort of intellectual cerebral thing that I try to balance it out with like a physical practice. So I try to do something hard every single day, running, swimming, biking. I do a walk once a day. Like I do something hard every day. And part of what that is, is transferable back to the practice, right? Because again, it comes down to the, you don't wanna do it, it's hard, it's not going the way you want it, but you've cultivated the muscle of being able to push through that. Like there's lots of claims about the health benefits of cold plunges and they may or may not exist. That's not why I do it, right? The muscle for me is the cranking of the knob of the looking at the cold plunge at my house and going, it is gonna be unpleasant to get in there, but I have the ability to force myself to do that. That's the muscle that you wanna cultivate. And I think, people wanna be the person on the other side of that, but they don't realize that the way you do it is by just starting it, just starting it. Yeah, it's so true. I can relate to so much of that in my own life. And when you're saying that, I feel like today, most of what I do, I'd say I spend a lot, I'd say I spend like 75% of my life outside of my comfort zone. I am constantly doing things that demand more from me than I believe I'm skilled and able to accomplish. And in a healthy way, in a good sense, because I feel challenged. And I feel that challenge forces me to grow my skills, which then meet a new challenge and then that keeps growing. But then I find myself in my personal life often resorting to comfort because I need to kind of cushion the amount of pressure and stress. For me, I'm at that place in my life where I'm like, okay, I'm pushing so much. I need my personal life to be super like, you know, cushioned to some degree. It is interesting, right? We will take, and Seneca points this out in one of his letters, like we'll push ourselves, we'll take risks to succeed financially, to succeed in business, to succeed in our careers, to buttress our reputations. But then we don't wanna do it in the other places where most of us would admit it actually matters, right? My favorite passages in meditations, Marcus Rios is like a better wrestler, but not a better forgiver of faults, a better friend in tight places. He's pointing out how we'll go like, yeah, I'm trying to like, you'll talk to someone that have this well laid out plan for how they're trying to increase their back squat or their mile time, or how they've got these aggressive goals for their stock price or, you know, how many copies they wanna sell of this thing, or they have really clear financial and professional goals. And then.